So I want you to emphasize that warning,
okay?
That this is not a common situations,
that we are going to mix different
techniques at the same time.
I mean, we can, it will work,
but you will see, for example,
on doing reactive
programming with the DOM.
We will see two or three techniques.
Yeah, probably you pick one and
stick with that one for the whole project,
but we will mix all of them, okay?
So before seeing some code,
but now we will see code,
but before working with our project,
let me go over
some essentials,
talking about the DOM API, okay?
So let's start defining the DOM.
The DOM is the Document Object Model.
And actually it's a representation
of the structure of a document in
memory that will let us connect to
web pages, the HTML to JavaScript.
It's actually a memory
representation of your HTML.
Is that the API?
No, that's the DOM.
So the DOM isn't a structure in memory.
That browsers are creating when
they are rendering a page, okay?
That's the DOM.
And the API, it's an API,
so a list of functions,
properties available under
different objects that a browser
is exposing to us so
we can manipulate, that's a structure.
From an scripting language
that today is JavaScript.
So we can change the structure in memory,
okay?
We can change a property, we can add
an element to that structure in memory.
And that will trigger an update in the
rendering HTML that you see on the screen.
So talking,
this is actually quick and dirty,
but it's like changing your HTML, okay?
From JavaScript.
Actually, we are not changing the HTML, we
are changing the DOM, but the browser is
representing that change in the UI and it
looks like we are changing the HTML file.
I mean the string, the HTML,
we are not changing that, okay?
We are changing memory representation, but
it looks like we are changing the HTML.
So the DOM API is
available in many options.
And we're not going to
cover 100% of the DOM API,
because it's really large, and there
are many things that I've never used.
So there are many parts of the DOM API
that are very specific for
some specific situations that
typically you don't use.
So I'm not going to focus on like
being verbose on the all the DOM API.
You have MDN and other places where
you can see everything in the DOM API.
So I'm going to show you
what's most important.
So we have for example,
the window global object.
The window global object is,
in JavaScript the current global context,
when you're running your scripts unless
we are talking about the worker,
a web worker, a service worker or
other kind of workers that we have today.
Unless we're talking about
workers those are threads.
Every script that you have have
access to the global variable, and
JavaScript goes to
the window global object.
And most of the functions
that we will see later
today are attached to that global option.
The window represents the window.
The problem is that the window
is not a clear concept this day.
So what's a window?
This comes from the 90s where
you have a window for one.
So one page was loaded in one window,
if you wanna open two pages,
you need to create a new browser window.
We didn't have tabs at the time, okay?
So we don't have that,
we didn't have tabs.
So every page was actually on a window,
and one window, one page.
This is not the case anymore.
So it's an unclear concept these days,
okay?.
But let's say that roughly it's like
a navigation, like a main navigation,
but it's not still there because
we have iframes as well.
When we have iframes like iframe
is a like HTML document or
the within another document, well,
it gets more complicated, okay?
But that's the window.
Then we have the Document Object.
That is more clear,
a document is a DOM, so a structure.
Typically since the 90s, we used to
have only one document per window.
So one HTML we are loading one HTML
if you have a link to another HTML,
that's another document.
So the only exception here were iframes or
even framesets originally,
where in that case, we could load
more HTMLs at the same time, okay?
But these days, and we will see
that later with web components,
we can have more than one document in the
same page navigation even without iframes.
And the document object
represents the current DOM,
the Document Object Model,
that memory structure.
Okay, that's the structure in memory.
And then we have the domain API
available on every object in the DOM.
So we will have one
object per HTML element.
So every HTML element in your
web app will have an object.
And that object, will have the DOM API.
Or one part of the DOM API
is sitting there.
So we can change things,
we can add, children,
we can remove elements from there.
And I'm saying there, other notes,
we won't get too deep in that part,
but actually, when you have text nodes,
we have comments in HTML.
Also, those elements that
they don't feel like objects,
when you see the HTML, they're also
objects, and they have also an API.
I mean, we don't typically want to
deal today at least with comments.
I mean, if you have comments in your HTML,
why do you wanna manipulate
that from JavaScript?
It was a thing years ago to do some hacks,
okay?
But not today.
Anyway quick sample basic,
this is very basic I know, but
some of you,
maybe the first time you're seeing this.
Let's say we have that HTML,
that's an HTML file index.html file,
we'll load that in the browser.
With this file, each element will be
represented by an object of an interface.
Let's say a class with
a name HTML element.
That's the class name in JavaScript, okay?
Originally, it was known as an interface.
But if you're coming from TypeScript or
other languages,
you will get better in the term class.
So there is an HTML element, okay?
And also, we have other elements
inheriting from that one.
For example, we can have an HTML
image element that is the class or
the interface when you have an AMG tag,
okay?
These objects or these elements,
we have properties,
instance properties and
methods to work with them.
Changes in those properties will
trigger updating the user interface.
And this is important,
when you're released the thread.
So sometimes I hear from React developers
that they like the virtual DOM, okay?
That's a concept that
doesn't exist a vanilla.js,
a virtual DOM, so what's a virtual DOM?
So virtual DOM in the case of React,
every library is different.
It's actually like a clone of the DOM,
the real DOM, but
managed completely by
the JavaScript library.
It's just like an array,
it's a collection in memory.
It has no direct relationship
with the real DOM.
That's the virtual DOM.
And some people think that,
well, it's better to work with
the virtual DOM because then
React will update the real DOM.
I mean, for example if you are making
ten changes at once, React
will receive that only in the virtual DOM
and it will update the real DOM once.
So it's more performant than vanilla.js.
And my first reaction to
that is that's false,
because if you're making ten
changes in the real DOM, okay?
It won't trigger any updates
until you release the thread.
So it will be kind of
similar in that case.
You will release the thread,
and the layout changes.
We will trigger when you release
a thread because you're competing,
we have only one main thread, and
our child script is competing with
the browser to use that thread.
So if you're changing the same property,
in the real DOM ten times
in the same execution,
the real DOM will just take the last one.
So we will see on the page the last one.
I'm simplifying this a little bit,
I'm not saying that this is the same as
the virtual DOM in terms of performance,
but we have some things here in mind.
Also, this might lead to some issues, and
I have these issues in my web apps a lot.
And there was a trick before
that is a set timeout 0,
I'm not sure if you have heard about that.
Because you change something in the DOM,
and
then you wanna use it immediately in
the same execution, and you can't.
Because it's not yet,
we didn't leave enough time for
the browser to actually make that change.
So the trick was to create
the set timeout 0, and
there is to defer an execution after
the browser was making the changes, okay?
Anyway, we don't need to do it anymore.
But just to let you know that happened.
And we can listen to events happening in
that element and reacting consequences.
Probably you have heard about
these you have seen this,
the famous today add event listener, okay?
So for example for this particular code
that you see there, we have the document.
I'm simplifying this a little bit, but we
have the document the document will have
the body and there is an HTML body
element, inheriting from HTML element.
Then we have the header element inside,
okay?
It's a child of the body, the header.
Inside the header we have the h1,
the interface for
the h1 is called HTML heading.
So we don't have an HTML h1 heading.
It's just a heading that will
be the interface for h1 to h6.
We have the paragraph and
we have an image.
And that's the DOM, that those
are objects in memory in JavaScript
of one specific class,
each object having methods and properties.
To work with those
elements from JavaScript,
we can pick them from the current DOM.
So I'm in JavaScript, so
I can pick one element from the DOM or
we can create them from JavaScript,
and then inject them in the DOM.
So if I wanna play with an image
like every five seconds I wanna
change the source of the image.
If I wanna change the photo, like
a photo gallery or something like that,
how can I change the image?
Well, I need a reference to that DOM
element for the for the img tag.
So I can pick them from the DOM, or
I can create it on the fly with JavaScript
creating a new object, for example, or
we will see different ways to do that.
And then put it into the DOM.
But we need a reference in
JavaScript to do that, okay?
To have a reference and
we can read its contents.
So when we have a reference, we can
read the content, change the content,
remove it from the DOM.
So I can take a reference
to an img tag and
then remove it or
I can add new elements to it.
So for example, back in our example,
if I get the reference
to the HTML heading element,
the h1 from JavaScript,
I can then delete that,
I can remove that object from the DOM.
And if I remove that object from the DOM,
it will trigger an update
after we release the thread.
It will release an update and
it will remove the h1, so
you won't see the h1 in
the browser anymore.
It's like going to the DevTools,
inspecting the HTML and
deleting the h1 manually, okay?
If I take the img tag, you can see the img
tag right now has a hidden property set.
Well, I can go when I get
the reference to that attribute for
that img element,
I can change the hidden attribute.
So if I change the hidden attribute,
I'm updating the contents
of that HTML element it will
trigger a change in the URL.
And also it's not just
playing with the current DOM.
I can create a new HTML image element,
but we'll see how later.
And then I can attach that
new element to the header,
for example, and that will trigger
a new img element in your HTML.
So that's the idea of how we
manipulate the content with vanilla.js.
So if you're coming from React,
it's not like we have a state.
It's not like we have a render method.
No, we are talking directly
to that DOM structure.
Yeah, question?
What do you mean release the main thread?
Release the thread, you can release the
thread in different ways in JavaScript,
but the simplest way to understand
that is that your function ends.
So you're executing some code,
because of some reason.
Most of the time,
it's because you have an event listener.
For example, you click on a button,
you are listening for that click event and
you have a function.
Well, at one point that function ends.
When that function ends,
you're releasing the thread because
there is no more code to execute.
So the JavaScript engine says, or actually
the Shastin time compiler thinks,,
there is no more code to execute,
so we are releasing the thread.
And in that point,
there is a set of operations in order.
And the browser will say, okay,
JavaScript, you finished.
Okay, it's my turn now, and
now I will do relay out, re-render there,
repaying, there are a couple of
processes there until it checks again if
there are more JavaScript to execute.
So talking this or
saying this in the quick and
dirty way is when your
event handler finishes.
When you have a function, so
if you have a while true in JavaScript,
you're not releasing the thread.
And most of the browser's
today after a couple of say,
I think Firefox, I think it's two seconds.
They will show you a message saying, hey,
this website is not responding anymore.
Should we kill the child's grip or
something like that?
Because if you don't release the thread,
and there is only one thread,
the browser cannot render
anything on the screen.
And when you are with your phone and
you are scrolling a website, and
you feel that it's not scrolling,
that it's kind of shanky.
That's because most of the time
there is a JavaScript code there,
there is not releasing the thread.
And because it's not releasing the thread,
the browser has no enough time
to detect that you are scrolling and
to relay out the contents of the screen.
So the thread is a big performance issue,
or understanding
the thread is a big performance
issues that you need to understand.
When you have things that will
take a lot of CPU time, you should
move that into a new thread that in
JavaScript is known as a web worker, okay?
And that's for a different day.
If we find delete a note and
then try to retrieve it in the next line,
where do we find it?
If you're using the DOM API to
retrieve it won't be there because
you'll remove it from the DOM structure,
but the user is still seeing that
on the screen, that's the problem.
So when you wanna show, I mean,
you wanna show a timer or
something that is changing on the page,
you need to release the thread because
if not,
the user will see the last state only.
I think that probably will clarify that.
So when you're working with the DOM API
without releasing the thread,
you're working with the memory structure.
So if you remove something
from the memory structure, and
then you go through a structure and
see if it's there, it's not.
Because you remove that
from the structure, but
the user is still seeing that
while you are doing that.
Okay, so
the difference is that when you're
released the thread the browser will see.
Now, if the what you see on
the screen matches the current DOM.
It's like the diff that React is doing
between the vDOM and the virtual DOM and
the real DOM.
I'm simplifying, but
it's kind of similar idea.
And then you will realize that there were
changes, and it will do a real layout and
repaint on the screen.
So in this case,
I'm not talking about the JavaScript, but
I'm talking about the the UI,
what the user says.
The user will not see the change
until you release the thread.
And releasing the thread means
that stop executing code,
just let the event handler finish it,
that's kind of idea.